good afternoon
at the federal reserve we are strongly
committed to achieving the monetary
policy goals that congress has given us
maximum employment and price stability
today the fomc kept interest rates near
zero and in light of the progress the
economy has made toward our goals
decided to begin reducing the pace of
asset purchases
with these actions monetary policy will
continue to provide strong support to
the economic recovery
given the unprecedented nature of the
disruptions related to the pandemic and
the reopening of the economy we remain
attentive to risks and will ensure that
our policy is well positioned to address
the full range of plausible economic
outcomes
i will say more about our monetary
policy decisions after reviewing recent
economic developments
economic activity expanded at a 6.5
percent pace in the first half of the
year
reflecting progress on vaccinations the
reopening of the economy
and strong policy support
in the third quarter real gdp growth
slowed notably from this rapid pace
the summer's surge in coveted cases from
the delta variant has held back the
recovery in the sector's most adversely
affected by the pandemic including
travel and leisure
activity has also been restrained by
supply constraints in bottlenecks
notably in the motor vehicle industry
as a result both household spending and
business investment flattened out last
quarter
nonetheless aggregate demand has been
very strong this year
buoyed by fiscal and monetary policy
support and the healthy financial
positions of households and businesses
with covid case counts receding further
and progress on vaccinations economic
growth should pick up this quarter
resulting in strong growth for the year
as a whole
conditions in the labor market have
continued to improve and demand for
workers remains very strong as with
overall economic activity the pace of
improvement slowed with the rise in
covet cases
in august and september job gains
averaged 280 000 per month
down from an average of about 1 million
jobs per month in june and july
the slowdown has been concentrated in
sectors most sensitive to the pandemic
including leisure and hospitality and
education
the unemployment rate was 4.8 percent in
september
this figure understates the shortfall in
employment particularly as participation
in the labor market remains subdued
some of the softness in participation
likely reflects the aging of the
population and retirements
but participation for prime aged
individuals also remains well below
pre-pandemic levels
in part reflecting factors related to
the pandemic such as caregiving needs
and ongoing concerns about the virus
as a result employers are having
difficulties filling job openings
these impediments to labor supply should
diminish with further progress on
containing the virus
supporting gains in employment and
economic activity
the economic downturn has not fallen
equally on all americans and those least
able to shoulder the burden have been
hardest hit
despite progress joblessness continues
to fall disproportionately on african
americans and hispanics
the supply and demand imbalances related
to the pandemic and the reopening of the
economy have contributed to sizable
price increases in some sectors
in particular bottlenecks and supply
chain disruptions are limiting how
quickly production can respond to the
rebound in demand in the near term
as a result overall inflation is running
well above our two percent longer run
goal
supply constraints have been larger and
longer lasting than anticipated
nonetheless it remains the case that the
drivers of higher inflation have been
predominantly connected to the
dislocations caused by the pandemic
specifically the effects on supply and
demand from the shutdown the uneven
reopening and the ongoing effects of the
virus itself
we understand the difficulties that high
inflation poses for individuals and
families particularly those with limited
means to absorb higher prices for
essentials such as food and
transportation
our tools cannot ease supply constraints
like most forecasters we continue to
believe that our dynamic economy will
adjust to the supply and demand
imbalances and that as it does inflation
will decline to levels much closer to
our two percent longer run goal
of course it is very difficult to
predict the persistence of supply
constraints or their effects on
inflation
global supply chains are complex
they will return to normal function but
the timing of that is highly uncertain
we are committed to our longer run goal
of 2 inflation and to having longer-term
inflation expectations well anchored at
this goal
if we were to see signs that the path of
inflation or longer-term inflation
expectations was moving materially and
persistently beyond levels consistent
with our goal we would use our tools to
preserve price stability
we will be watching carefully to see
whether the economy is evolving in line
with expectations
the fed's policy actions have been
guided by our mandate to promote maximum
employment and stable prices for the
american people
along with our responsibilities to
promote the stability of the financial
system
our asset purchases have been a critical
tool they helped preserve financial
stability early in the pandemic and
since then have helped foster smooth
market functioning and accommodative
financial conditions to support the
economy
last september sorry december the
committee stated its intention to
continue asset purchases at a pace of at
least 120 billion dollars per month
until substantial substantial further
progress has been made toward our
maximum employment and price stability
goals
at today's meeting the committee judged
that the economy has met this test
and decided to begin reducing the pace
of its asset purchases
beginning later this month we will
reduce the monthly pay pace of our net
asset purchases
by 10 billion dollars for treasury
securities and 5 billion for agency
mortgage-backed securities
we also announced another reduction of
this size in the monthly purchase pace
starting in mid-december since that
month's purchase schedule will be
released by the federal reserve bank of
new york prior to our december fomc
meeting
if the economy evolves broadly as
expected
we judge that similar reductions in the
pace of net asset purchases will likely
be appropriate each month
implying that increases in our
securities holdings would cease by the
middle of next year
that said we are prepared to adjust the
pace of purchases if warranted by
changes in the economic outlook
and even after our balance sheet stops
expanding our holdings of security
securities will continue to support
accommodative financial conditions
our decision today to begin our tapering
our asset purchases does not imply any
direct signal regarding our interest
rate policy
we continue to articulate a different
and more stringent test for the economic
conditions that would need to be met
before raising the federal funds rate
to conclude we understand that our
actions affect communities families and
businesses across the country
everything we do is in service to our
public mission
we at the fed will do everything we can
to complete the recovery and employment
and achieve our price stability goal
thank you i look forward to your
questions
thank you we'll go to nick at the wall
street journal
hi nick timmeross of the wall street
journal chair powell the markets
anticipate you will raise rates
once or twice next year are they wrong
um
so
i would say it this way
we try to focus on what we can control
and that is uh how to communicate as
clearly as possible in this highly
uncertain world how we're thinking about
the economic outlook and the balance of
risks and how policy will
uh
evolve uh in that case and also in the
cases which are
frequent where the economy evolves in
unexpected ways so the focus at this
meeting is on tapering asset purchases
not on raising rates
it is time to taper we think because the
economy has achieved substantial further
progress toward our goals measured from
last december we don't think it's time
yet to raise interest rates there is
still ground to cover to reach
maximum employment both in terms of
employment and in terms of participation
getting to your question our baseline
expectation is that supply bottlenecks
and shortages will persist well into
next year and elevated inflation as well
and that as the pandemic
subsides supply chain bottlenecks will
abate and job growth will move back up
and as that happens inflation will
decline from today's elevated levels of
course the timing of that is highly
uncertain but certainly we should see
inflation moving down by the second or
third quarter
the time for lifting rates and beginning
to remove accommodation will depend on
the path of the economy we think we can
be patient uh if if a response is called
for we will we will not be we will not
hesitate
so
what i will tell you is we're watching
carefully to see whether the economy
evolves in line with our expectations
and policy will adapt
appropriately
and that's what i would say
based on if i could follow up based on
your current outlook for the labor
market
do you think it's possible or likely
even that maximum employment could be
achieved by the second half of next year
so if you look at the progress that
we've made over the course of the last
year
if that pace were to continue then the
answer would be yes i do think that that
is possible
of course we measure maximum employment
based on a wide range of figures but
it's certainly within the realm of
possibility
thank you
thank you next we'll go to gina
at the new york times
hi chairpal um i was wondering if you
could detail a little bit how you're
thinking about wages at this moment
obviously we're seeing strong wage
growth particularly for people in sort
of lower income fields um i wonder if
you see that as a positive thing or as a
potential start to a wage price spiral
and sort of how you sort of delineate
those two things
so
wages have been moving up strongly very
strongly and in particular i would point
to the
employment compensation index
reading that we got last friday now in
real terms they've been they had been
running a little bit below inflation so
real real wages were not really
increasing i think with the eci reading
it becomes close to
uh
maybe not increasing but close to back
to back to zero in terms of the real
increase
so
wages moving up of course is how
standard of living increases over the
years for a generation upon generation
it's very important
and it's generally a good thing uh you
know the concern is
a somewhat unusual case where if rage's
wages were to be rising persistently and
materially above
uh inflation and and productivity gains
that could put upward pressure on
uh
on or downward pressure on margins and
cause companies to their employers
really to
to
raise prices as a result and you can see
yourself find yourself in in what we
used to call a wage price spiral we
don't have evidence of that yet um
productivity has been very high
uh the eci reading is just one reading
again if you look back uh
we we
so we'll be watching this carefully but
i would say that that at this point we
don't see we don't see troubling
increases
in wages and and we don't expect those
to emerge but we'll be watching
carefully
what is steve leesman from cnbc
uh
thank you mr chairman i wonder if you
could uh
perhaps uh give us your thinking about
the trade-offs between inflation and
unemployment you've talked about the
shortfall of unemployment or employment
all the things before the pandemic
and yet you have inflation which is
affecting everybody um are we at or
close to a point where the risk of
inflation is greater than the benefit
that you'd uh for recovering these lost
jobs so that now from a risk management
standpoint it makes sense to move more
aggressively on rate hikes kind of a
related question the statement today
says you'll keep policy accommodating so
you hit that two percent inflation
target our surveys show
looking for five percent inflation this
year
three and a half percent next year it
sure seems like you're on track to
modestly or moderately exceed that two
percent target thanks
yeah so
i'm not sure i totally got your first
question but but i would say
in fact could you just quickly
succinctly say your first question again
sure the idea that that the trade-off
between inflation unemployment that
you're that you would keep policy
accommodative to put this five million
folks or find these five million jobs
again at the same time all americans
will be suffering from higher inflation
is that trade-off worth it or is it
better or smarter to raise rates right
now that's combat inflation uh and
perhaps not lean so heavily on the
employment side of the mandate yeah so
you know this isn't this isn't the
traditional phillips curve situation
where there's a direct trade-off where
that's really what we're talking about
the inflation that we're seeing is
really not due to a tight labor market
it's due to
bottlenecks and it's due to shortages
and it's due to very strong demand
meeting those
so um
i think it's not the classical situation
where you have that that precise
tradeoff but i you know in this
situation um
we we do have a provision in our uh in
our
uh statement on longer run goals as you
know that says when when those two
things are in tension what we do is we
take into account the employment
shortfalls and inflation deviations and
the potentially different time horizons
over which employment and inflation are
projected to return to levels judged
consistent with the mandate so it's a we
used to call that the balanced approach
paragraph we have to think about the
amount of the deviation we have to think
about the time it will take and we have
to make we have to make policy in a
world where the two goals are in tension
it's it's very difficult what it but
what it really boils down to is
something that's
common sense and that is risk management
we have to we have to be aware of the
risks that were
that particularly now the risk of
significantly higher inflation we see
uh shortages and uh bottlenecks
persisting into next year we see well
into next year we see higher inflation
persisting and we have to be in position
to address that risk should it become
uh should it become really a threat uh
to to should create a threat of more
persistent longer-term inflation and
that's what we think our policy is doing
now it's putting us in a position to be
able to address the range of plausible
outcomes
thank you next we'll go to colby smith
at the financial times
thank you um chair powell what are the
economic conditions um that would
perhaps warrant a faster uh pace of
tapering and i'm wondering how you would
also characterize the risks that the fed
may actually need to accelerate that
process eventually thank you
so i guess as i said in my opening
remarks assuming the economy
performs broadly as expected
uh the committee judges that similar
reductions in the pace of net asset
purchases will likely be appro
appropriate each month and we're
prepared to deviate from that path
uh if warranted by changes in the
economic outlook so
i'm not going to give you a lot more uh
detail on what that might be of course
if we do see something like that
happening if it becomes a question then
we'll communicate very transparently and
openly
about that but i'm just going to leave
it with the words that are in the
statement so was there a second part
um yeah it's just on characterizing the
risks that you you might actually have
to uh to do so later on
you know i would just leave you with
with the words we have here um we we are
prepared to
speed up or slow down
the the pace of reductions in asset
purchases if it's warranted by changes
in the economic outlook and again if we
if we feel like something like that's
happening then we'll be we'll be very
transparent about we wouldn't want to
surprise markets we'll we'll say in
light of of
of this factor or these factors
uh we are considering
doing this and then we would either do
it or not do it but so uh but i'm not
gonna you know start making up examples
of what that might be today thanks
thank you
next word a rachel siegel at the
washington post
all right powell thank you so much for
taking our questions um you mentioned at
the beginning that the fed understands
the difficulties that high inflation
poses for individuals and families
especially those with limited means
what is your message to those families
or consumers that are struggling with
higher prices right now and do you feel
that your expectations around transitory
uh inflation is that message is reaching
them thank you
yeah so
first of all we it is our job to and we
accept responsibility and accountability
for inflation in the medium term our it
is it you know we're accountable to
congress and to the american people for
maximum employment and price stability
the level of inflation we have right now
is not at all consistent with price
stability by the way we're also not at
maximum employment as i mentioned so
i i would want to assure people that
that we will use our tools as
appropriate
to get inflation under control
we don't think it's a good time to raise
interest rates though because we want to
see the labor market heal further and we
have very good reason to think that that
will happen as the as the delta uh
variant uh
declines so which it's doing now
you know do as i mentioned so transitory
is um
is a word that uh people have has
have had different
understandings of for some it carries a
sense of of uh short-lived and that's
that's you know there's a real time
component measured in months or let's
say really for us what transitory has
meant is that if something is transitory
you will not leave a behind it
permanently or or very persistently
higher inflation so that's why we you
know we took a step back from transitory
we said expected to be transitory first
of all to show
uh uncertainty around that we've always
said that by the way in other contexts
we just hadn't done it in the statement
but also to acknowledge really that that
um
that it means different things to
different people and then we added some
language uh to to to really explain more
what we're talking about in paragraph
two in paragraph three
um we said that uh supply and demand
imbalances related to the pandemic and
the reopening of the economy have
contributed to sizeable price increases
then we said progress on vaccinations
and an easing of supply constraints are
expected to support continued gains in
economic activity and employment as well
as a reduction in inflation so we're
we're trying to explain what we mean
and and also acknowledging more
uncertainty about transitory so it it's
um i mean it's become a word that's
attracted a lot of attention that maybe
is distracting from our message which we
want to be as clear as possible
ultimately the only other thing i would
say is look we understand completely
that it's particularly people who who
are living paycheck to paycheck or
seeing higher grocery costs higher
gasoline costs
when the winter comes higher heating
costs for their homes we understand
completely
what they're going through and
um you know we we will use our tools
over time to make sure that that doesn't
become a permanent uh feature of life
really that that's that's our one of our
principal jobs along with achieving
maximum employment
and that's our commitment
thank you we'll go to chris rugaber of
the associated press
great uh thank you michelle uh thank you
chair powell um
well i wonder if you could update us you
talked about getting back to full
employment um
and
so could you update how you
how you define that i mean you've you
know a few months ago yourself and other
fed officials talked about getting back
to the pre back to the pre-coveted labor
market
uh there was even hints you might try to
do something better than that
uh now we hear talk of as you mentioned
people retiring and there's talk of not
being able to get back is all the jobs
back because of that and other trends
uh you did mention the primage uh folks
so can you
give us some
examples of things you're looking at
specifically to measure full employment
will you be looking at prime age
employment population ratio for example
and if so do you need to see that get
back to
pre-coveted levels
for to to achieve maximum employment or
is is there something short of that that
would work
thank you so thanks so maximum
employment is um
it's a broad we say broad-based and
inclusive goal that's not directly
measurable and changes over time
due to various factors
you can't specify a specific goal so
it's it's taking into account quite a
broad range of things and of course
uh employment levels of employment
participation uh are are part of that
but in addition there are there are
other measures of of what's going on in
the labor market like wages is a key a
key measure of how tight the labor
market is the level of the level of
quits
um the amount of job openings uh the
flows in and out of various states so we
look at so many different things and you
make an overall judgment now the
temptation at the beginning of of the
recovery was to look at the the data in
february of 2020 and say well that's the
goal because we didn't know any that
that's what we knew that we knew that
was achievable in a context of low
inflation i think we're in a you know
we're we're learning now we have to be
humble about what we know about this
economy
which is still very
very uh you know covet affected by the
way you know a lot of what we're seeing
in the last 90 days is because of delta
we were on a path to a very different
place
delta put us on a different path and and
we see these things but so i think we're
going to have to ideally we would have
we would see further development of the
labor market in a context where there
isn't another another coveted spike and
then we would be able to see i think a
lot we would see whether how does
participation react in that world in
that sort of post-covered world
right now people are staying out of the
labor market to do because of caretaking
because of fear of covid
in significant to significant extent
you know we we thought that the uh that
schools reopening and the and elapsing
unemployment benefits would
would produce some sort of a of
additional labor supply that doesn't
seem to have been the case interestingly
so i think there's there's room for a
whole lot of humility here
as we try to think about what maximum
employment would be we're going to have
to see
some time covid so that we know or post
delta anyway to see what is possible and
i think the learning from for those of
us who live through the last cycle is
that over time
um you can get to places that that
didn't look possible now
what we also have now though is we have
high inflation so we have a completely
different situation now where we have
high inflation and we have to balance
that with what's going on in in the
employment market so it's a complicated
situation but and i would say we will we
hope to achieve significantly greater
clarity about where this economy is
going and what's what the
characteristics of the post-pandemic
economy are
over the first half of next year
thanks we'll go to howard schneider at
reuters
ah thanks and thanks for doing this so
so given that answer about uh employment
i would like to get back to steve's
question a little bit
on a headline basis just as it's evolved
this year do you feel that the two tests
on inflation have been met
sorry the two tests
the two tests in the in the state of the
guidance that it has to hit two percent
and beyond track to moderately above it
for two percent has the economy cleared
that
that's a decision for the committee i
would i would put it to you this way
by when we reach maximum employment when
we reach a statement a state where labor
market conditions are maximum are at
maximum employment in the committee's
judgment it's very possible that
that the inflation tests will already be
met
we're aware that that language sounds it
sounds a little out of touch with what's
going on but
uh you know we're not at maximum
employment when when the when that when
that is the case we'll look to see
whether the inflation test is met
and there's a good chance that it will
be if you look at how inflation has
evolved in the last year and a half
so to follow up so you're not willing to
commit
that the current levels of inflation and
their persistence have met
moderately and for some time
so uh given that i mean how we should
rent how should we render what
moderately and uh
moderately over and for some time
what i'm really saying is that question
is not before us right now we're we're
we're you know we were we had the
question on when to taper we've now
answered that question and the speed of
it and all that we're not we have not
focused on whether we meet the liftoff
test because we don't meet the liftoff
test now because we're not at maximum
employment what i'm saying is when given
where inflation is and where it's
projected to be
let's say we do meet the maximum
employment test then the committees the
question for the committee at that time
will be
has the inflation test been met and you
know i i don't i don't want to get ahead
of the committee on that but the answer
may very well be yes it's been met but
we're not asking that question today
because we're not we're not running the
liftoff test we're not evaluating the
liftoff test today we didn't have that
discussion
at today's meeting we did talk about the
economy and the development of the
economy but we didn't ask ourselves
whether the liftoff test is met because
you know it's clearly not met on the
maximum employment side
thank you
thank you let's go to matthew bosler at
bloomberg
hi chair powell i'm matthew bosler with
bloomberg um so when you're looking at
this question of assessing whether or
not the u.s economy is at
maximum employment do you have a
framework for making that judgment that
is independent of what inflation
is doing
and if not um
does it kind of complicate that
assessment given all of the uncertainty
about inflation right now and the
inclination to
believe that you know the high inflation
we're seeing is not related to
um
capacity utilization in the labor market
thank you
so
we don't actually define maximum
employment as
we don't we define it in in terms of
inflation but of course there is a
connection there maximum employment has
to be a level that is consistent with
with stable prices
but but that's not really how we think
about it we think about uh in maximum
employment as looking at a broad range
of things you can't just look at unlike
inflation where you can have a number
uh but with with maximum employment you
could you could be in a situation
hypothetically
where uh where the unemployment rate is
low but there are many people who are
out of the labor force and will come
back in and so you wouldn't really be at
maximum employment because there's this
group that isn't counted as unemployed
so so we look at a range of things and i
you know so by the thing is by many
uh measures we are at a very tight labor
market i mean i mentioned quits and
job openings and wages and things like
many of them are signaling a tight labor
market but the issue is
how persistent is that because you have
people who are held out of the labor
market you know of their own
they're holding themselves out of the
labor market because of caretaking needs
or because of fear of covid or for
whatever reason they're staying out and
it's it's clear that there are you know
with tremendous demand for workers and
wages moving up
it does seem like we're set up to go
back to a higher job creation so that
would suggest that you're not at maximum
employment so at the end of the day it
is a judgment thing but of course it at
the end it also has to be a level of
employment that's consistent with uh
with price stability
and if i could just follow up briefly
you know you talked a little bit about
this possibility that the two goals
might be intention and how you would
have to balance those two things could
you talk a little bit about what the
fed's process
for balancing those two goals would be
in the event that say come next year you
decide there's a serious risk of
persistent inflationary pressures
despite ongoing employment shortfalls
yeah i mean again it's a it's a risk
management thing it's not i i can't
reduce it to a to an equation but also
ultimately it's it's about risk
management so you you want to
be in a position to
uh
to act it to cover the the full range of
plausible outcomes not just the base
case and in this case
the risk is skewed
for now it appears to be skewed toward a
higher inflation so we need to be in a
position to act in in case it in case it
becomes necessary to do so or
appropriate to do so and we think we
will be
so that's how we're thinking about it
and
i i think though that
judgmentally too it's appropriate to be
patient it's appropriate for us to
to see what the labor market and what
the economy look like when they heal
further we know that we were on a path
to a different place as i mentioned
when delta arrived and delta stopped it
stopped job creation it stopped that
transition away from
a goods-focused economy where there's
excess demand for goods because their
services are not available people are
not traveling that transition itself
could help bring inflation down because
presumably people would spend a little
less on on goods while they start
spending on more on travel and and all
sorts of travel services and things like
that so that we want to see that healthy
process
unfold as we as we decide what the true
state of the economy is and we think it
will evolve in a way that will mean
lower inflation
bottlenecks should be abating we start
to see that now with some of them but
but overall they haven't gotten better
overall and we're you know we're very
aware of that
so that's that's really how we're how
we're thinking about it we're thinking
that time will tell us more in the
meantime we don't think it's time to
raise rates now
it you know if we do conclude that that
that it's necessary to do so then um
we'll be patient but we we won't
hesitate
thank you let's go to edward lawrence at
fox business
thank you mr chairman for taking the
call so the federal reserve i'm going to
talk about climate change the federal
reserve released a statement today
says the federal reserve supports the
efforts to identify key issues and
potential solutions for the
climate-related challenges most relevant
to central banks and supervisory
outcomes
is this putting us on the path to
regulate what banks can offer loans on
or invest in like coal plants or fossil
fuels
so that's that's not a decision for bank
regulators or for any uh agency that's
that's a decision for elected
representatives so what we we feel that
uh
any any role that we have and we do
think we have a role in climate change
it relates to our existing mandates and
our existing mandates are really
prudential regulation of financial
institutions we expect them and the
public will expect us to expect them to
understand and be in a position to
manage their risks so that's physical
risk and its transition risk for climate
and by the way the large financial
institutions are doing this
already and and you know we're that's we
think that's right within our mandate
there's also a financial stability
question question that the overall
stability of the financial system uh and
so from that standpoint we can do
research we can try to help understand
what will the pathways be through which
climate change affects the economy both
physical risk and transition risk that's
what we that's what we can do and that's
what we will do and we'll we'll do it
well within within the frame of our
existing mandates we'll do it well we're
we're not the people who will decide the
national strategy
on climate change that has to be elected
people
and uh and and not not so much us but we
we feel like we have that that narrow
mandate and we will we will do it well
thank you
great thank you victoria guida at
politico
hi chair powell um so the fed recently
announced that there's going to be new
conflict of interest rules for
investments by fed officials and um this
follows obviously the the resignation of
two regional fed presidents and i'm just
wondering do you think that there's more
that you will need to do to rebuild the
credibility of the fed such as you know
requiring officials to put their assets
in blind trusts
and also if you could speak to whether
you have any concerns that any rules or
laws were broken by fed officials thank
you
so we
you know we
let me let me just say that this system
the ethics system we had in place had
been in place for decades
and had as far as we know serva served
us well
and then that was no longer the case and
so we we had no moment of denial about
that
uh as a group we stepped in and we took
the actions that we took
and
you know within one fomc cycle we we
announced a new set of rules to
uh you know to try to
uh
put us back where we need to be which is
we need to have the complete trust of
the american people that we're working
in their interest all the time
absolutely critical to our work as it is
for any government agency and i feel
like this this called that into question
so we we reacted i i would characterize
it strongly and
and forcefully um if there were other
things that we could do that that were
reasonable we would certainly do them so
you asked about blind trusts um the you
know the overall
authority for ethics
around these issues in the federal
government is the office of government
ethics oge
and they have a a long-held position uh
which is not favorable to blind trust
they do not encourage them they don't
think they're effective they think
they're
cumbersome and and uh and they think
there are better ways to get at
the things that need to be done and and
those are the things that we're actually
doing so there i don't know that there
are any blind trusts for that reason
because they are the they're the
irregular they say this on their website
if you look
um in terms of laws broken uh you know
that's i i asked the inspector general
to to look to
see whether there were rules broken and
whether there were laws broken and i
won't speculate on that but that is that
is that is with the inspector general
now and of course out of my hands
thank you we'll go to mike mckee at
bloomberg
mr chairman uh the critics of your
patients policy argue that given the
long and variable lags with which
monetary policy works that you are
likely to end up given inflation
by having to raise rates faster and
farther than you would have liked and
therefore send the economy into
recession given the fact that basically
your forecast has been chasing inflation
over the last year and now you're
talking about it not coming down till
the second or third quarter
why would they be wrong in thinking that
well
so let me say
uh
what's happened
and we're
very very
straightforward about it is that
inflation is coming higher than expected
and uh
bottlenecks have have
been more persistent
and more prevalent
we see that just like everybody else
does and we see that they're now on
track to persist well into next year
that was not expected not expected by us
not expected by other macro forecasters
now let me say
you know it's difficult enough to just
forecast the economy in normal times
when you're talking about
you know global supply chains in turmoil
it's a whole different thing and you're
talking about a pandemic that's holding
people
out of out of the labor force for
reasons that we we can we can sample but
we can't we don't have a lot of
experience with this so it's very very
difficult to forecast and not easy to
set
policy
so we have to set policy though so
that's what we're doing and you know so
to look at your question this way i
don't think that we're behind the curve
i actually believe that policy is well
positioned to address the range of
plausible outcomes and and that's what
we need to do i do think it would be
premature to raise rates today that that
that does that's not i don't think
that's controversial certainly
uh i don't know anyone arguing for that
today but
and the reason is that there's there's
still ground to cover to get to maximum
employment and we don't want to
stop that when when there's good reason
to think there's still good reason to
think although it's been delayed clearly
there's good reason to think that the
economy will reopen particularly if we
do get past you know significant
outbreaks
of covid
that's when we're really going to see
what the what the characteristics of the
labor market are
and you know i think
the you know the bottlenecks that we're
seeing
in global supply chains around goods and
frankly now at our own domestic ports
because demand is stronger than the
capacity of those ports
those things are going to work
themselves out we have a flexible
economy it'll take some time but you
know it tooks it it took
you know the experts managed to create a
vaccine faster than certainly than i
expected and i think this stuff will
work itself out over the course of next
year that is my my uh baseline
understanding and that's very widely
held among
among people but you know we are
prepared
for different eventualities and we will
use our tools to achieve price stability
and maximum employment
and we're going to let the data lead us
to where we need to go our policy will
adapt and has already adapted
to the changing understanding of
inflation and of bottlenecks and and the
whole supply side story
which is also partly a demand story so
our policy will continue to adapt as is
appropriate
you let's go to nancy marshall genzer at
marketplace
hi well hi chair paul thanks for taking
our questions so you announced that the
fed is going to taper at a rate of
starting at 15 billion a month and
that's more than twice the pace of the
last paper so why are you tapering
faster this time
the uh the economy is in a quite a
different place than when we tapered
back in i guess it was 2013.
um we were much farther away from
maximum employment
inflation was much lower
this is an economy where demand is very
very strong very strong and job openings
substantially exceed the number of
of unemployed people so the need for
further stimulus is far less than it was
uh in 2013 where we still had quite a
ways to go i mean after we began that
taper it was still many years before we
reached
what i would characterize as conditions
consistent with maximum employment
let alone price stability so this is
quite a different situation and you know
the committee unanimously
felt today that we had met the test that
we'd articulated and then this was
appropriate and
and um this is faster than than you know
than
what people had expected uh six months
ago it's it's earlier and faster and
that's that's because our as i mentioned
our policy has
been adapting to
the situation as it evolves as it's
clarifying itself and that's partly
because we see inflation be coming in
higher
so
thank you let's go to mike derby
i
yeah thank you for taking my question i
wonder if the fed has given any thoughts
yet to the uh end game for the balance
sheet in terms of you know once you get
the taper process complete will you hold
the balance sheet steady or were you
allowed to start passively winding down
and then in a related question
do you have any greater insight into
what fed bond buying actually does for
the economy in terms of its economic
impact have you been able to you know
measure it or quantify it in any any
fashion um you know because
i'm sure you know there's often been
questions about what is bond buying
actually doing to help the economy
sure so in terms of the balance sheet
those questions that you mentioned we we
haven't gone back to them
now that we've tapered i expect that
that's exactly what we'll do in coming
meetings and we'll do it in an orderly
fashion and we'll we'll talk about
reinvestment and all those things
and
we don't have to make decisions on those
yet but you know typically when we're
doing a new subject like that we'll have
a series of briefings and discussions
and that's what we will now begin to do
in terms of the effect of um of asset
purchases on the economy so
there's a
tremendous amount of research and
scholarship on this and you know
you can kind of
uh you can find different people coming
out with different views but i i would
say the most mainstream view would be
that you're at the effect of lower bound
so how do you affect longer term rates
there are two ways one you so you can't
lower rates let's say let's say you
can't lower rates any further
hypothetically so you can you can give
forward guidance you can say we're going
to keep the rate rates low for a period
of time either a specific period until
certain conditions are met the markets
will do the math and that'll have an
effect on longer term borrowings even
even you know 10 30 years out kind of
thing so that's one thing the other
thing you can do is you just go buy
those securities buy longer longer-term
securities that will drive down
longer-term rates and hold them lower
and you know rates right across the
right across the rate spectrum matter
for borrowers so lower rates encourage
more borrowing encourage more economic
activity people that you can service
your debt you have more free cash flow
you know it's it's not different from
what we do with the short end
uh so that that's that was discussed
long before anybody did it that was i
think milton friedman said that that was
what you could do if you were pinned at
the lower bound
many many years ago so anyway that's
that's how it's supposed to work and you
know the it's it's quite hard to
be precise about these things because
you know you only have one economy and
you can't run two different economies
right next to each other and do a
scientific experiment but most people
find most of the findings are that that
it does support economic activity in the
way that you would expect which is to
say at the margin
more economic activity with lower rates
which is why we do what we do more
more more accommodative financial
conditions lead to more economic
activity over time with a lag so
i think that's that's uh the main
finding i would i would i would say on
on qe
thank you thank you we're going to go to
paul lamonica at cnn
chairpal chairpal you've addressed
already uh questions about the uh the
stock purchases that took place from
some of the regional fed presidents and
uh you know addressing the american
people to
make sure that they can trust the fed i
was wondering also in light of the fact
that you know we now have questions
about your own future whether or not
president biden will nominate you for a
second term what would you say to
the president and to senators that
potentially you will be voting on a
renomination
about this specifically with regards to
your future as a as fed chair for a
possible second term
so i'm not gonna i won't have any i will
answer your question paul but i i i'm
not gonna have any comment whatsoever on
on
the renomination process at all i i will
say though that i have briefed
administration officials and i've
briefed people on capitol hill
uh
in detail about what we did and why we
did it and seeking their feedback
getting their reaction but i you know
this is part of part of my job is
congress has oversight over
over the fed and we take that very
seriously so if you're on if you're on
our uh one of the two committees that
that has oversight over us then i'm in
regular contact with you probably and
you know when something like this comes
up i'm on the phone i'm offering to meet
with you and explain it to you and
answer your questions and and identify
any concerns people might have that's
just part of my job so i i do that i
don't talk about particular
conversations but
you can assume i'll always do that and i
certainly did it in in this case
thank you thank you let's go to hannah
lang at the american banker
hi i wanted to ask about the
supplementary leverage ratio is the
fed's still planning on seeking comment
on ways to permanently adjust that and
how concerned are you ultimately about
bank's willingness to intermediate in
the treasury markets without a permanent
fix
so
i don't have anything for you on
supplemental leverage ratio right now we
are looking at at ways to um
if there are ways we can address
liquidity issues through that channel
we're also we also have a um there's
a a working group that headed by
treasury
about over over treasury markets and
what happened in in the in the acute
phase of the pandemic and what
structural things
uh may need to be done so that would be
part of that uh part of that work stream
and i i
i know that there's a lot going on i'm
not sure when that report will be out
um but so it's it's work underway that's
one of the many issues that are part of
that along with things like central
clearing of treasuries greater central
clearing and and you know many other
ideas it's it's important that we have a
liquid treasury market it's a it's a
huge public benefit that we do
and you know i i think we need to
do those things that that enable that
what you know while also assuring safety
and soundness of our largest financial
institutions who tend to be the main
dealers
so we we have to make sure that that
that's always a first order concern as
well
thank you thank you let's go to brian
chung at yahoo finance
hi chairman pal uh brian yahoo finance
so just to expand on the ethics
conversation uh you talked about how you
engaged with people on capitol hill and
in the administration you talked about
what you've done already but i'm just
wondering if you could take a step back
and just assess whether or not there was
reputational damage as a result of that
either from the public's view or from
the financial community's view of the
federal reserve's independence and then
secondly do you look back on the whole
episode and have thoughts on your
individual responsibility in preventing
something like this from having happened
you know it's i think it's too soon to
say what the reputational damage is i
think from the very beginning uh my
reaction was we need to deal with this
straightforwardly transparently and
forcefully and that's what we're going
to do i mean it's
it means everything to me that we take
do whatever it takes to to make sure
that nothing like this happens again and
i i like to think
we've made a real good start on that if
you think about it you you cannot
execute a trade
unless it's pre-cleared and then you
have to you have to say
execute it's not even a trade real
really there's no trading going on this
is for
investment
and
you know getting liquidity for life's
expenses but you then have to wait 45
days
to actually execute that sale or
purchase
so i i think it's a pretty good system
we're we'll always be looking to uh
to make it better uh so
in terms of our independence you know i
i i
look i think we we will address this
and i think we have and i like to think
it's enough but it's gonna you know we
we're we're just beginning to implement
it we have to write the rules which
we're doing you know as quickly as
possible we need more people we're gonna
have to resource this much more
significantly here at the board
and also we're going to need appropriate
technology because you know we're going
we have the fed has more than system has
more than 30 000 employees not all of
them f far fewer of them will be will be
covered by this but the senior officers
uh who are who will be covered by this
will you know will have to have
technical technology access and it's
going to have to work efficiently so
there's a lot of work to do to to
implement it
you know
again i would just say
um this system has been in place for
decades and i i it was in place when i
took over
it was in place for the last at least
the last three or four chairs and and
you know
it it was what it was
and
you know it proved to have weaknesses in
it and part of that was
it wasn't uni uniformly enforced across
the system i'm a big believer in the
value of the federal reserve system in
the reserve banks but you had 12
different ethics officers at 12
different banks and you had ethics
people here and you know compliance
wasn't it wasn't all exactly the same it
was it was a little bit different and
uneven
and and also the rules were you know we
didn't we didn't imagine
the the problems that happened and they
they may have actually been i don't know
this but they may actually have been in
clients with the specifics of our rules
they were clearly not in compliance with
the part of our rules that said
don't do anything that that would
that would create a bad appearance i
mean that's that's clear this was a bad
appearance
so
um
anyway what what can we do we we are
where we are it happened and we just
have to deal with it forthrightly and
transparency and own it and uh
step up to this you know meet this
moment that's i'm totally committed to
doing that and uh
again if they're if they're better ideas
i want i'd love to hear them but i think
we've we i think we have
so far
um made a good start
when you said you spoke with
administration officials did that
include the president
i'm not gonna i'm not gonna answer who i
spoke to at all i just i'm not gonna i'm
not gonna give you any names so don't
take that as a yes or no i'm just not
going to start down that road
okay thank you we're going to go to jeff
cox for the last question
yeah thank you uh chair i just want to
dig a little bit deeper on employment um
we've seen what's been called the uh the
great resignation um with
folks leaving their jobs in record
numbers um
is there any feeling there that maybe
you've been accused of fighting the last
war that perhaps the labor dynamics have
changed um in in the post-covet
environment and that uh full employment
may not look like what it looked like
before
yeah so what's happening is
people are leaving their jobs they're
quitting their jobs in
uh
all-time high numbers but
in many cases going back into employment
and getting higher wages so a lot of the
higher wages you're seeing are for job
switchers rather than incumbents
so that's just that's a sign of a really
strong labor market as opposed to people
just running off and quitting there have
also been there there are significant
number of retirements
and we'll just have to see what that
means so toward toward the end of the
last cycle which was the longest in in
our recorded economic history
we did see
um
labor force participation moving up well
above what what economists estimate was
the trend
um and part of that was people staying
in the labor force
older and or just not retiring at the
rates they were expected to retire so
maybe this was just catch up on that
i am a believer that over time
you you won't know how far
you won't know what can happen with
labor force participation
in advance and you're just going to have
to give it some time because we we saw
that over and over again where there are
things that we can where we can say you
know
this is where this is where the limit is
labor force participation is a much more
flexible
uh subject uh for me and so i i do think
we need to be humble about about what
the limits are of labor force
participation but we expect labor force
partici participation to pick up
we don't know the pace at which it will
do so
so in terms of full employment
um as i discussed earlier i think at the
very beginning of the recovery the
natural thing to do was to look back at
labor condition labor market conditions
in february of 2010 at the end of the
longest expansion in our history it was
so much to like about that labor market
really historically
good labor market never perfect but a
good labor market
we're in a different world now it's this
is a um
it's just very different
the
the pandemic
recession was the deepest and the
recovery has been the fastest
and wages didn't really go down and you
know real incomes were more than fully
replaced by fiscal policy all of this is
completely unusual you know the an
economy where inflation was driven by by
services is now inflation where all the
inflation is in goods which have had
negative inflation for a quarter century
so you ask about full employment i think
we have to
i'm very open to the thought that that
it's going to be
an empirical question of where it is
located and we're just going to learn
more and more i mean one thing we'll
learn i think i hope we'll learn in the
next
in the near term is
once the delta variant really does
continue to decline what's going to
happen to employment are we going to
start to see over the winter
you know significant increases in jobs
again if you look back the three six and
nine month average job creation is
between five fifty five hundred fifty
thousand and six hundred thousand
so
if you think of that as a stronger you
don't have to think back to the million
job months of of june and july you can
just think okay 550 to 600
if we we should get back on that path
then we would be making good progress
and we'd like to see that of course so
we'll know so much more and believe me
we understand it's it's a different
world in so many ways
and we're very open to that
thank you mr chair and thank you all for
joining us today